Edward Osborne Wilson (born June 10, 1929), usually cited as E. O. Wilson, is an American biologist, naturalist, and writer. Wilson is an influential biologist who on numerous occasions has been given the nicknames "The New Darwin", "Darwin's natural heir" or "The Darwin of the 21st century". His biological specialty is myrmecology, the study of ants, on which he has been called the world's leading expert.Wilson has been called "the father of sociobiology" and "the father of biodiversity" for his environmental advocacy, and his secular-humanist and deist ideas pertaining to religious and ethical matters. Among his greatest contributions to ecological theory is the theory of island biogeography, which he developed in collaboration with the mathematical ecologist Robert MacArthur. This theory served as the foundation of the field of conservation area design, as well as the unified neutral theory of biodiversity of Stephen Hubbell. 
Wilson is the Pellegrino University Research Professor, Emeritus in Entomology for the Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology at Harvard University, a lecturer at Duke University, and a Fellow of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry. The Royal Swedish Academy, which awards the Nobel Prize, awarded Dr. Wilson the Crafoord Prize, an award designed to cover areas not covered by Nobel Prizes (biology, oceanography, mathematics, astronomy etc.). He is a Humanist Laureate of the International Academy of Humanism. He is a two-time winner of the Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction (for On Human Nature in 1979, and The Ants in 1991) and a New York Times bestselling author for The Social Conquest of Earth, Letters to a Young Scientist, and The Meaning of Human Existence.
He has written more than 30 books and published more than 430 scientific papers, some of them being the most cited in history and the cover of such important scientific journals as Nature or Science. His articles "Character displacement" published in 1956 in co-authorship with William Brown Jr., "The Theory of Island Biogeography" prepared together with Robert H. MacArthur in 1967, "Experimental zoogeography of islands: the colonization of empty islands" prepared in 1969 together D. S. Simberloff and his books "The Insect Societies" and "Sociobiology: The New Synthesis" were honored with the Science Citation Classic award, the most important award that identifies the most cited works or works that are references on the field.He has also received more than 150 prestigious awards and medals around the world, as well as more than 40 honorary doctorates. He is an honorary member of more than 30 world renowned and prestigious organizations, academies and institutions. He has been invited to give lectures at more than 100 universities and institutions around the world. Two animal species have been scientifically named in his honor.In 1995 he was named one of the 25 most influential personalities in America by Time magazine, and in 1996 an international survey ranked him as one of the 100 most influential scientists in history. In 2000, Time and Audubon magazines named him one of the 100 Leading Environmentalists of the Century. In 2005, Foreign Policy named him one of the 100 most important intellectuals in the world. In 2008 he was elected one of the 100 most important scientists in history by the Britannica Guide. In the following years and up to the present he has been included in numerous similar lists such as the list "The 50 most influential scientists in the world today" prepared by TheBestSchools.